%!TEX root = ../Project.tex

\section{Conclusions}
\label{sec:conclusions}

\emph{[@todo: Obviously this will need to be updated and expanded when the
project has concluded!]}

% This is similar to the abstract. The difference is that you should assume
% here that the reader of the conclusions has read the rest of the report.

% Talk about the methodology you adopted and why you chose. Make sure you
% mention what worked and what did not - explain why you think things did not
% work or could be improved - this shows learning from the experience. This
% section should be a summary of everything you have done with your personal
% comments and findings and perhaps some discussion on whether you agree with
% the references you cited.

\subsection{Research}

While the research carried out formed a strong basis for creating a web
application, the lack of time dedicated to implementation meant that some
parts of the research could not be put into practice as much as I would have
liked. For example, it would have been beneficial to spend far more time with
the project clients and end users in order to perfect the interface.

Furthermore, it became clear during implementation that there were areas I
should have researched more thoroughly, particularly database theory. This was
not helped by my unfamiliarity with the framework and associated tools, which
were creating the database structure from the entities defined.

Early in the research period (before implementation started) I decided to
demonstrate research progress to clients by creating simple \gls{html}
prototypes that had no logic behind them. Showing these prototypes to the
group may have resulted in the non-technical stakeholders believing that
implementation was further progressed than it actually was. I would still
create prototypes in the future as I believe they are the best way to involve
a client in the development process, but I would more carefully explain that
it is simply a prototype with no application code working behind it.

\subsection{Application}

Although there was less time available for implementation than I would have
liked, I feel I have met one the key requirements: maintainability. The
software would require quite some work if it was to be maintained centrally by
the University. Code quality in places is not as good as I would expect from a
bespoke purchased product, but as the software is written using a framework
that University developers are familiar with I would hope that they would be
able to understand the structure of the application and improve the code in
far less time than it would take to create a similar application from scratch.

As mentioned in Section~\ref{sec:issuesarising}, if undertaking a project
similar to this in the future I would first create a high-fidelity prototype
in a language I was very familiar with in order to meet the requirements. I
would then look at re-implementing the application in a language that would
allow it to be maintained by other developers as required. It would be
possible to re-use certain aspects of the prototype code (for example, some of
the front-end code), and I am of the opinion that this second implementation
would be of higher quality. Whether or not this approach is suitable would
depend on the nature of the project. As the module allocation software was
fairly isolated from other systems and was a relatively small application, I
think this would be a good approach to take.

There was a trade-off made between my inexperience with the chosen software
framework (and therefore the amount of time implementation took) and the
usefulness of the application to \gls{itservices}. In this case, I believe the
trade-off was beneficial to the project - I managed to create a working
(though far from perfect) application, and the code will still be of some use
to the University. However, it is easy to imagine a result where by I was
unable to create anything useful with the framework. This is the reason for my
recommendation to implement twice and re-use where possible.

\subsection{Pilot}

These underlying issues notwithstanding, the trial of the software was
definitely a success. During the week when students selected their modules
very few issues arose, and those that did were mitigated with the help of the
departmental administrators. The application was received positively by
students, who gave feedback to the departments on the module selection
process.

\emph{[@todo: Conclusions on how the allocation went]}

% The History department reported that the entire application saved them
% approximately \emph{##} days of work. The figure given by the Archaeology
% department was slightly less at \emph{##} days, as it is a smaller department,
% but this is still a significant time saving.

An area I would like to have spent more time improving is the allocation and
associated constraints. If running this project again, I would be more firm
with eliciting allocation-related requirements from departments earlier in the
process, helping them to be decisive in quantifying soft constraints (such as
the coefficients used in the objective function). This should be easier in
future years as this pilot has provided some results which can be improved
with feedback from the departments.

Due to the deadline for this report I am unable to comment on whether students
were satisfied with the modules they were allocated, but the departments
appeared happy with the allocation that was produced.
